John 8 starting in verse 31.
To the Jews who had believed him, Jesus said, if you hold to my teaching, you are really my disciples.
Then you will know the truth and the truth will set you free.
They answered him, we are Abraham's descendants and have never been slaves of anyone.
How can you say that we shall be set free?
Jesus replied, very truly, I tell you, everyone who sins is a slave to sin.
Now a slave has no permanent place in the family, but a son belongs to it forever.
So if the sun sets you free, you will be free indeed.
This is the word of the Lord.
Thanks be to God.
The Kazni people banned of the Tillamook tribe historically lived on Cascade Head, a gorgeous spot out on the Oregon coast.
And they held a ceremony which would be unthinkable in our modern
ecological climate.
They did a ritual burn of a portion of the land, which actually aided in the reforestation of the environment there.
But it wasn't just striking a match and then calling it a day.
This ceremony was marked by ritual, by dances and feasts and prayers, all of which were meant to instill a spirit of gratitude within the tribe.
gratitude for the gifts of this patch of land that we call home, a commitment to understand the land, relationally, rather than economically, at the bounty of creation, not just resources to pillage, but gifts to receive and save her.
The botanist Robin Wall-Kimmerer and her wildly popular collection of essays, Braiding Sweetgrass, writes about the Nikizany people, calling their rituals practical reverence.
a way of making my ordinary life sacred, converting something ordinary like the need to farm and fish in order to survive into something spiritually formative, like gratitude to God and trying to steward creation in God's image, which sounds a whole lot like Genesis, doesn't it?
A prayer shaped life.
That's the title of our current teaching series.
And it's all about the long range view of prayer, less what might happen tomorrow if you pray today and a whole lot more.
Who might you become by prayer over decades?
And we began by tackling how prayer shapes us into people who be with Jesus, become like Jesus and do what Jesus did.
And now we've made a turn into what a devoted life to prayer looks like in daily practice and up for today.
is in the morning, we pray scripture.
In the middle of the 18th century, a philosopher named John Wickliffe was in Oxford, quietly translating the Bible from Latin into English, insisting on widespread access to the scripture for all people, not just the priesthood.
And for that, Wickliffe was excommunicated from the church as a heretic.
His corpse was burned along with his life's work.
and his ashes were scattered unceremoniously in the river Swift.
In every possible way, worthless life and work was wiped from history, but of course, his legacy went on to live and his contemporaries and the revolution he gave his life for was not burned along with his body, but it rolled forth until Martin Luther famously nailed it to a church door in the form of 95 Theses.
And so today, if you walk across the central lobby of London's Houses of Parliament, you will walk over the words of Psalm 127 etched into the marble floor.
The late Queen Elizabeth II, when she was crowned in 1953, was presented with the Bible and the public declaration in a political assembly, we present you with this book, the most valuable thing this world affords.
Here is wisdom.
This is the royal law.
These are the lively oracles of God.
The very same seats of political power, blessing the burning of Wycliffe's body and work, are now inscribing the subject of his work on their office floors and blessing it as the most valuable thing this world affords.
Six centuries after Wycliffe paid an astounding price to put scripture into the hands of ordinary people, the U version Bible app offers over 3,650 versions of the Bible translated into 2,360 languages, all of it entirely free.
Wycliffe was disgraced, but his legacy completely reshaped not only his own nation, but the world's access to the Bible.
What a radical shift.
I wonder if an equally radical shift in the way that we view and think about the Christian scriptures has taken place over the last 25 years or so.
In the same nations and societies were just a generation ago, the Bible was being publicly revered as the oracles of God.
The same Bible today is widely mocked, generally distrusted, and mostly ignored.
Statistics show that 78% of Americans own a copy of the Bible, but only 9% of them read it with any regularity.
There has never been a time or place in the history of the world where the Bible was so widely available but less read than it is in the western world today.
George Gallup called the Bible the best-selling least read book in America.
So how do we get here?
from revolutionaries and public executions, from a powerless few who saw the words on these pages are so potent that they would give their lives just to get these pages into your hands and mine.
And a powerful majority on the other side of that that saw the words on these pages are so potent that they would commit murder to stop these words from getting into your hands and mine.
How do we get from there to the best-selling, least-read book?
Well, philosopher Charles Taylor in his seminal work A Secular Age talks about how the West has changed from a culture of authority to one of authenticity.
Previously, righteousness was measured as the restraint of desire for the sake of a moral standard.
In our modern secular society, though, righteousness has been redefined as the free and unrestrained gratification of authentic desire and the rejection of any universal moral standard.
These days authority is suspect and authenticity is king.
If there's a universally celebrated mantra in modern Western culture, surely it's this, be yourself.
You do you live your truth.
Above all, be true to yourself.
If you trace that mantra all the way back to its roots, you'll find yourself in pre-colonial Europe and the pen of Shakespeare.
But your authentic self is a famous quote from Hamlet, one of his most popular plays.
The original line was, this above all, to thine own self be true.
What we seem to have forgotten is the character touting that mantra.
It was Polonius the Fool.
The modern western gospel is a line borrowed from a fictitious fool.
Pause for a moment just to take stock of the profound cultural shift from authority to authenticity.
During the time of Shakespeare, the intellectuals of the day shaping the thought of cultural consciousness thought it was foolish to be yourself.
that the search for truth in authenticity alone was a path that led deeper and deeper into foolishness.
They thought it foolish to define your authentic self by looking within and then gratifying desire undisserningly as a pathway to fulfillment, freedom, and truth.
Today we think it's foolish to do the opposite.
to submit to some form of outer authority as a pathway to freedom, fulfillment, and truth.
In fact, authority is not just viewed as foolish today, but dangerous, repressive, and oppressive.
For most of human history, it's been the responsibility of all people to restrain their desire for the sake of maturing into their authentic selves.
In recent history, it's become the right of all people to gratify their desire for the sake of freeing their authentic selves.
Now look, are there abuses of authority?
there absolutely are.
Is authenticity bad?
Of course it's not.
I'm simply noting that an undisserning submission to either one will not deliver on its promises.
How did the Bible become the best-selling least read book in the modern world?
Well, how did it go from being in the drawer of every motel six in America and yet no one even bothers cracking an open?
Well, I would say because
The Bible is a collection of writings claiming authority.
2 Timothy 3, all scripture is God breathed and was useful for teaching, repeating, correcting, and training in righteousness.
The Bible is making a claim about itself, that it's a whole lot more than just the poetry of Shakespeare, the prose of Stephen King, or the ancient wisdom of Socrates, or the op-ed piece you read this week in the Atlantic.
The Bible is claiming to be the revelation of the creator himself in ink and on paper.
Biblical authority is a very unpopular idea, and a culture suspicious of all authority and anyone who has it, be it institutional authority, a person who's in authority, or a book claiming authority.
And among Jesus' more popular sayings is the mic drop line that we read in the teaching text a moment ago.
Now, what's interesting is that Jesus
remains very popular in a celebrated historical figure, even here and now in our age of authenticity.
And Jesus says this, look back in the, your Bible's John chapter eight.
I wanna pick up in verse 32.
Jesus says, then you will know the truth and the truth will set you free.
So in this simple, memorable statement, Jesus is making a twofold claim.
The first is that truth can be known.
And secondly,
that knowing the truth leads to freedom.
Philosophers are very commonly distinguished between two different types of freedom.
There's freedom from and freedom to.
The former is mostly an outer definition of freedom and the latter is a deeper internal definition of freedom.
So freedom from is the ability to make
choice is apart from the coercion or force of an external oppressor.
That's a very good and true definition of freedom.
It's worth defending and protecting.
It's not all that freedom is though.
Freedom two is less about the constraints of an outer oppressor and it's more about the inner constraints of a deceiver.
Philosophically, the deeper variety of freedom that involves constraint of certain lesser desires for the sake of freeing deeper, truer desires.
That's what you're celebrating every time you attend a wedding or a baby shower, by the way.
The restraining of certain desires for the freeing of true desires, right?
To love another person is a very constraining choice to make.
Marriage is quite literally a restriction on your freedom.
But, of course, marriage is equally the liberation of your love.
Love flourishes between two people when they limit their intimacy to a single relationship.
Parenthood is a significant constraint on my freedom, right?
To responsibly raise and care for another human being shuts down plenty of other legitimate lifestyle choices that I could make.
At the very same time though, parenthood when it's lived well is the most formative, profound relational gift one can give to another psychologically speaking.
It's a constraint that I choose
which liberates my desire to love my child well.
Love, the deepest human desire, it flourishes in what my friend Jared Boyd calls the freedom of constraint.
Harvard and Stanford scholar, Elton Trueblood, once said, we have not advanced very far in our spiritual lives if we have not encountered the basic paradox of freedom to the effect that we are most free when we are bound.
theologian Tim Keller more recently said,
We see that freedom is not what the culture tells us.
Real freedom comes from strategic loss of some freedoms in order to gain others.
It is not the absence of constraints, but choosing the right constraints and the right freedoms to lose.
Then you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.
In making that claim, Jesus is implying that every single person on the receiving end of his teaching is something less than free.
that all of us are imprisoned, that we're internally enslaved by the lives of a deceiver.
And if that offends you, it's probably not because you're overly sensitive.
It's probably just because you're paying attention.
And the priest that Jesus said this to you got very defensive in response and launched into arguably Jesus' most volatile argument, all based on his invitation to freedom through truth.
Be yourself, you do you live your truth.
Those are the kind of statements that celebrate the first kind of freedom.
Freedom from any outer coercion or oppressor.
Oppression is violence is the transatlantic slave trade that is still rippling through American culture like a childhood trauma in our nation's history.
And oppression as mild or subtle as the popular kids in school that make fun of anyone that doesn't conform to their version of cool.
Jesus and the biblical authors celebrate the idea of freedom from
any form of coercion or oppression like that.
The trouble is that Jesus and the biblical authors don't stop with freedom from.
They're concerned about your internal freedom too.
And if we apply the same principle, be yourself, you do you live your truth to that deeper internal kind of freedom.
The freedom that liberates my ability to love
Well, then living my truth, doing what I want so long as it doesn't hurt somebody else, gratifying my desire and an unfiltered celebration of my authenticity.
Well, that doesn't in the end lead to an inner kind of freedom.
It leads to a personal kind of bondage, to enslavement, to appetites that rule over me.
Jesus and the biblical authors don't counsel you to be yourself.
They take it a step further than that, to become yourself.
Your deepest freedom lies not in your freedom to do whatever you want, but your freedom to become who you long to be, to become who God created you to be.
And that the deepest, truest kind of freedom that we all really want, it involves authority with authenticity.
You know, most people actually don't have a problem with biblical authority.
The problem is that for the majority of us, those most bullish about the authority of Scripture carry that conviction in a way that seems entirely unauthentic.
They claim to know the truth, but the truth they know doesn't seem to be the kind that liberates love.
Dallas Willard said, few things are more terrifying in the spiritual arena than those who absolutely know, but who are unloving, hostile, proud, superstitious, and fearful.
Likewise, John Orberg said to be filled with knowledge about the Bible, but to be unwashed by it is worse than not knowing it at all.
If you know the truth, well, then it certainly doesn't seem to be the variety Jesus talked about.
the sort that sets you free, the sort that makes you into love.
So let's rewind just a little bit in John's Gospel from John chapter 8 where we're reading from back to John chapter 4 when Jesus is sitting on a well next to a Samaritan woman in the heat of the day sharing a cup of cold water.
And Jesus in his conversation with her diagnosis where authenticity apart from any form of authority has led her into five marriages and now a sixth-living boyfriend, a winding lifelong search for love, leaving heartbreak and havoc in its wake.
And then he drops a line that lowers her defenses and raises her intrigue.
Yet a time is coming and has now come when the true worshipers worship the Father in spirit and in truth.
For they are the kind of worshippers the Father seeks.
You see, Jesus is defining a kind of love that when directed towards God leads to personal freedom, a spirit and truth kind of love.
Or in Charles Taylor's lingo, an authority with authenticity.
Jesus did not have a problem with biblical authority.
In John chapter 10, he said, the scripture cannot be broken.
In Mark 12, David himself speaking by the Holy Spirit, and then Jesus quotes from the Psalms.
In Matthew 4, referencing the Old Testament book of Deuteronomy, Jesus says, it is written.
Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of God.
Jesus calls the Bible words from the mouth of God.
He claims that the Bible's authors are speaking by the Holy Spirit, and he claims that the biblical story is unbreakable.
Jesus did not have an issue with God's authority through the Bible.
Jesus had a major problem with those in authority who used biblical authority in an unauthentic way that made other people less.
Jesus took issue with people that carried the truth apart from the Spirit.
And Jesus claims that the Bible really is the truth that sets you free.
It is the written authority of God.
And Jesus claims that he really is the truth that sets you free.
He is the embodied spirit of God.
John chapter 14, I am the truth, I'm sorry, I am the way and the truth and the life.
Jesus is the first in a long line of people claiming to live by authority with authenticity and you're invited to come along with him and be free.
But you won't find that freedom by thumping the Bible.
That's not the truth that sets you free all by itself.
So if you're put off by the idea of holding the ancient wisdom of scriptures as your life's authority, the author that you allow to hold the pen and write, the story that you're living in today, I would just strongly encourage you to think really hard about this question.
Is it biblical truth I'm rejecting?
Or is it the way
that the loudest voices in my life have carried biblical truth.
Because Jesus says he is the way and the truth that leads to life.
So if I'm rejecting the truth because this person or that people group or that institution carried the truth in a way that looked to me a whole lot more like hate than love, then you're in danger of throwing out the truth that sets you free
Because you ran into people that looked a lot like the guys arguing with Jesus when he made that very statement.
And Jesus doesn't seem to like their company any more than you do.
Don't reject authority because it was held apart from authenticity.
Live by radical biblical authority with authenticity.
The truth of Jesus and the way of Jesus that leads to the life of Jesus.
You see this story
When it's lived and practiced, according to the character of this Savior named Jesus, that's the only way that leads to freedom.
You want in?
The Nicasne people gather further annual ceremony, a series of rituals aimed at practical reverence, a way of making my daily life sacred, converting something ordinary into something spiritually formative.
What if you and I could live that way?
What if you and I could offer the ordinary of our lives for the formation of our souls?
You know, the cascade head ceremony, it was a ritualistic in the sense that the aim of the practice wasn't to execute the practice flawlessly.
The aim was to have a life that is shaped by this practice.
It's to live by a series of rituals that is going to shape us into a community and individual people of gratitude
in all the time when we're not at the ceremony.
And what if prayers like that?
Powerful in the world, absolutely, instantly, miraculously effective.
Of course it is.
But what if it's greatest power?
Is the way it quietly, slowly, subtly makes your practical life
your errands and obligations and needs and relationships.
What if it converts all of it into something reverent, sacred, charged with the very presence and power of God?
What if prayer's greatest aim isn't how it felt today or what might happen tomorrow?
What if prayer's greatest aim is who it shapes me to become over the years and decades of showing up to this ritual of, dear God,
It's me again.
From the very earliest moments, the three religions that all trace their roots back to Abraham, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, all three have shared a few common assumptions about the formation of the inner life, about spiritual formation.
All three appoint a weekly day for sacred worship.
All three require tithing some way to
disentangle yourself from attachment to money and be generous to your local faith community.
And all three from the very inception assumed a daily ritual of stopping at certain intervals every day to pray.
All three were ordered by a daily prayer with them.
And today the Islamic mosque and the Judaic temple and the Christian church, they all still observe a weekly day of sacred worship and a regular commitment to the practice of tithing.
And Islam and Judaism still order the lives of their disciples by a daily prayer rhythm.
The Christian church, though, we've forgotten one of the fundamental assumptions about spiritual formation, a life devoted to, so devoted that it's even ordered by prayer.
A daily prayer with him guided and grounded the life of God's people in practice in the Old Testament temple before Jesus and the Jerusalem temple during the life of Jesus.
It was the way that Jesus ordered his time with himself and his disciples and it was the rhythm that guided the Christian church for her first 300 years.
Pause to pray at morning, midday, and evening.
That is the daily ritual of God's people.
The healthy diet of the spiritual life is how I take the monotony of this Tuesday and then convert it into something sacred, eternal, heavenly.
A healthy diet preserved in the modern church, only in the abbeys and monastery of monastic orders.
But it's been forgotten among common disciples like us.
Today, every monastic order, every last one of them orders their days by stopping to commune with God in prayer before returning to activity.
And today, every tradition within the Christian church, every last one of them lives without such a rhythm.
It's my reflection
that modern Christians are unique among all the world's people who are serious about the formation of their souls in this way.
We assume we can become who we want to become spontaneously by good intentions, apart from the power of ritual to shape our becoming.
To order my life by an ancient daily prayer rhythm, the very one that has guided and grounded God's people since and even before Jesus himself is the daily practice of authority with authenticity.
It's how I live by the spirit and the truth that frees me deepest.
And here is where prayer starts, the true foundation on which you build your days in the morning, pray scripture.
Okay, enough theory, let's be honest, we've been in the clouds to this point.
I want to bring this crashing into the ordinary practical of your everyday life by spelling out as clearly as I possibly can the when what and how of the practice of praying scripture each morning.
So let's start with when.
I want to begin just by exploring the significance of the morning.
In his book, A Days Close, historian A. Roger Eckrich explains that for the vast majority of human history, all the way up to the Industrial Revolution, in fact, it was very normal to divide the night between two periods.
The first longer period of the night was called the first sleep or the dead sleep.
It lasted from the evening all the way to the early hours of dawn, and it was when deep
lasting sleep occurred.
The second period or morning sleep often occurred after daybreak and there was an interruption between the two.
It was common just as the day was dawning to become restless, to feel the need to get up and move around for a minute before returning to bed, to go to the bathroom or to get a snack or step up for a smoke or to get up to pray.
And then after the dawn, restlessness, there would usually be a little bit more drowsiness leading to
a little bit more sleep, which means that the snooze button is even more ancient than the alarm clock, so you're in good company there.
But it also means that anxiety has always loomed largest in the early morning hours when many people toss and turn in a restless search for a little bit more peace and quiet.
When is anxiety most likely to pounce on you?
When do irrational thoughts most frequently race through the human imagination?
When to ask it biblically?
Are you most likely to hear and maybe believe the deceiver's lies?
For the majority of human beings, it's been in the early morning.
You see, the morning is both the time of greatest anxiety and the time of greatest clarity for most people.
It's the period of the day when irrationality is most likely to arrest you
And when rationality is most easily restored, isn't that fascinating?
Then you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.
Implying, remember, that you and I are something less than free.
You and I are bound by the lies that we believe from a deceiver who prowls around like a roaring lion looking for someone to devour.
How, then, do I take my daily stand against the devil's schemes as scripture instructs?
Ephesians 6.
Finally, be strong in the Lord and in His mighty power, put on the full armor of God so that you can take your stand against the devil's schemes.
For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers against the authorities against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms.
That's Paul for the daily combat you're engaged in is inside of you.
It's with the very liar who's whispering those restless, irrational, anxious thoughts as you're twisting and turning this morning looking for a little bit more peace.
Skip to verse 14.
Stand firm then with the belt of truth buckled around your waist.
What is the very first way that you arm yourself against the author of anxiety?
You give your ear to the author of truth.
You turn your attention to Scripture.
in the wilderness when Jesus himself was tempted by the Genesis serpent.
He responded to every last one of the temptations with Scripture.
He quotes the Bible with truth.
Jesus Christ, the Apostle Paul, pop psychology, historic sociology, and ancient rhythmic prayer all agree.
When you are most vulnerable to anxiety, you are also most receptive to peace.
And the way you choose peace is by truth.
You get to choose your source of truth.
You get to choose your authority.
You get to choose the author behind the story that you are going to live today.
You do not have full agency over your thoughts, feelings, and emotions.
You cannot just read a few words from scripture and then be washed in a soundbath of effortless peace.
What you can do, though,
is choose day in and day out, whose truth you're going to give authority to.
You see, the piece of Jesus, it works not like a prescription, but more like a daily vitamin.
The way that we build a stronger immune system to live peacefully in a world full of anxiety and lies.
Am I still gonna get sick if I take my daily multi?
Yeah, you will sometimes.
Well, am I still going to get anxious if I read and pray the Scripture each morning?
But slowly, as the years of your life ticked by in this practice, you will become more and more deeply rooted in the truth.
You will become more and more resilient against the lies that the enemy whispers to you.
Your spiritual immune system will grow stronger and stronger against the toxicity that's in the air of the time that you live.
You see, the wisdom of psychology affirms above all else, the neurons that fire together, wire together, right?
That's Hebb's law.
It's a fancy way of saying you become like whatever you pay attention to.
And whatever you give your attention to first, that has exponential formative power in your life.
So what?
What story in your life at present gets your attention first each day?
Is it the story of your lack of who you aren't?
The story of your hunger?
Do you wake up each day planning how you're going to gratify what you most want that day?
Or the story of your heroism?
Do you wake up to win the day?
The story of your impending defeat?
Do you wake up to fear the day?
Is it the story of the world's news as you check the headlines or the story of your personal news as you check?
your notifications, what story gets your attention first each day?
And the reason that question's worth asking is because you become like what if you pay attention to and whatever you pay attention to first as exponential formative power in your life.
Maybe there's a reason that the vast majority of saints throughout history have prayed first thing each day.
As it turns out, there's a lot to win.
You pray the scripture.
And then there's what?
Now let's just be honest, the Bible is a thick, complicated book, isn't it?
Like it's got some page turning moments, don't get me wrong, but it's not like nipping at the heels of Reese's Book Club.
Technically it's not even a book, it's a library of 66 writings that includes history, poetry, letter, and story.
So what scripture should I pray?
Well first you should know there's no tried and true right answer to that question.
many different ways to pray scripture, all of which are good and very useful.
Some read the Bible one book at a time.
Others do a Bible in a year type reading plan.
Some focus in on the gospels.
And then you've got tools like the Book of Common Prayer, which includes daily readings from the Psalms Old Testament and New Testament.
We publish an annual reading plan called Bread that's based on the Book of Common Prayer.
Arguably though, the most ancient and broadly adopted form of praying scripture is reading and praying the Psalms.
The Psalms ordered the prayers of the Old Testament temple.
They ordered the prayers of Jesus himself and his disciples, and they ordered the prayers of the Christian church after Jesus.
In the four Gospels, Jesus quotes the Psalms more than any other biblical book.
He almost always quotes the Psalms and mones of temptation toward anxiety.
He defends himself against the enemy's lies first and primarily through the Psalms.
So if Jesus found the Psalms to be a useful script,
by which to equip himself to live at peace in an anxious world, then surely it's a script that you and I can find some use of as well, right?
The Psalms, that's where we start praying Scripture each morning, and that's because the Psalms, uniquely among all the 66 biblical scrolls, teach us to pray in spirit and in truth.
The Psalms are uniquely powerful in ushering us under the shelter of God's authority, because when authority was usurped from God first, back in Eden, when the serpent tempted Eve, he came after her when she was alone.
And that wasn't an accident.
That was on purpose.
And that's not an anomaly.
It's a trend.
Dietrich Bonhoeffer said it so well.
Sin demands to have a man by himself.
It withdraws him from community.
The more isolated a person is, the more destructive will be the power of sin over him.
Don't you have the story of a friend coming to mind when you hear that quote?
Maybe a pattern in your life coming to mind.
You and I are more vulnerable to lies when we are isolated.
We are more likely to lose ourselves when we're alone.
In the words of John Ortberg, we mostly sin alone.
but we heal together.
That's a shorthand way of saying, look, the wrong community sure can threaten to conform your true self into its false image, the right community though.
Oh, that's the shaping hands of love that are molding you into your true God imprinted image.
So you and I are lied to by the deceiving war alone, but we're also mostly praying to the author of truth alone too, aren't we?
Now, through our church history that hasn't always been the case, but it's definitely the case in modern church history.
So we mostly sin alone, but we also mostly try to heal alone also.
So what are we supposed to do about this?
What can we do about this?
Well, one thing we could do is pray the Psalms because every time you pray one of the 150 biblical Psalms, you are borrowing the words of another believer who's several steps ahead of you on the narrow way.
The words that thousands upon thousands of apprentices of Jesus have added their voices to throughout history.
And the words that plenty of saints are adding their voices to today.
Every time you pray the Psalms quietly alone in the early morning, you are both praying a prayer that's been shared by the community of followers of Jesus, the church, and you're making that prayer uniquely and authentically your own for that day.
You really are.
Praying by yourself at the foot of your bed with the Bible open on your lap and about with early morning anxiety and you really are being cheered on by a heavenly cloud of witnesses who have prayed those very prayers and found them to be life and life to the full in their own stories too.
The Psalms are a collection of 150 common prayers brought into the unique life you're living today and the unique circumstances you're carrying today.
That means the Psalms are always both a new discovery and a return to a great formative tradition, both at the same time.
That's the truth that we access through the Psalms.
But what about the spirit, the authentic way that I carry the truth of Jesus in the way of Jesus?
Well, you know, something really important is going to happen to you if you begin to pray through the Psalms.
You're going to hit a line or two you don't like.
Like something that you don't want to pray to God.
Sometimes because it just doesn't sound like you.
But probably more often because it just doesn't sound like God.
Like something you think he'd want to hear or pray or you think he'd want to entertain.
The truth is the Psalms, they revealed a garden variety of human motives.
A few of the lines in the Psalms even go against the teachings of Jesus.
Like, God please smite my enemies to the God who says, no turn your other cheek.
Meaning some of the Psalms are technically heretical.
Well, then how on earth did they get into the Bible?
Because they're honest.
See, the rest of the Bible teaches us the truth about who God is and who I am.
The Psalms teaches the spirit in which I come before the one true God.
Theologian and poet Malcolm God says the Psalms are in part just for training the soul and honesty.
That's what makes the Psalms exemplary.
Is there teaching you and I to come before God in authentic honesty?
God's looking for a relationship.
He's not after well-prepared speeches emerging from perfect human motives.
God listens to David overreacting rage and devolve into despair.
He entertained David's anger and his pouting.
And then he called David a man after his own heart.
When it comes to prayer, God is not grading essays.
It's not a Toastmasters class.
He's talking to children.
So if God can delight in prayers as dysfunctional as a few of the ones we find wedged into the middle of our Bibles, then surely he can handle yours too without you cleaning them up first.
The Psalms are uniquely useful scripture for prayer because they do not always teach us what to pray, but the Psalms always teach us how to pray.
And that brings us to the final note on this prayer practice.
How do I not merely read the Psalms as the ancient journal entries of somebody else, but how do I pray the Psalms and make them my own today?
And for that, why don't we just visit the first lines of the first prayer in the book of Psalms, Psalm chapter one verse one.
Blessed is the one who does not walk in step of the wicked or stand in the way that sinners take or sit in the company of mockers, but who's delight is in the law of the Lord and who meditates on his law day and night.
And as Hebrew verb meditates, it's the Hebrew hagah.
And it's a word that is translated in a number of different ways as a really wide semantic range.
There are 25 instances of this word in the Old Testament, and it's brought into English as meditate, but also as moan, mutter, ponder, plot.
But the one I find most interesting occurs in Isaiah chapter 31, where it's translated growls.
This is what the Lord says to me, says Isaiah, as a lion growls, a great lion over its prey.
Eugene Peterson describes a moment when he was reading this verse and was considering what it meant.
And his attention as he thought about all this was drawn to the family dog that happened to be lying there at his feet.
And it was gnawing over a bone, growling over it like it was in a fight with this thing.
And he just watched the way the dog savored the bone was content to work on this bone for hours, slowly pulled every ounce of flavor from it.
And he thought, oh, that's it.
That's the meditation of Psalm 1.
That's the growling of Isaiah 31.
That's how we read the Bible.
Prayerfully, we chew on it.
We talk with God aloud about what we hear Him saying to us through the Scriptures.
We gnaw on it.
We taste it.
We're nourished by it.
We pray the Psalms when we're dog and boning the Psalms.
Where's the first place in the Bible that anything else is said about the writing of the Bible?
Does anyone know?
It's in Exodus chapter 17.
Then the Lord said to Moses, write this on a scroll as something to be remembered.
So this is really interesting.
You get through what was later broken down into roughly 70 chapters before ever arriving at any comment about the writing of this book at all.
And then, God miraculously delivers Israel from the Malachite army.
And he says to Moses, hey, you might want to write this part down.
Why should we write it down as something to be remembered?
Okay, great.
We want to remember this thing.
Remember who God is.
Remember what he's doing.
Pass on this story to generation after generation.
So all the people coming after you can build their lives on the testimony of who you've discovered me to be and yourself to be.
Wonderful.
How are we supposed to remember all the stuff that happened before you told us to write any of this down?
Well, before God gave Israel a pen,
He gave them a meal, a meal that's called Passover.
Gather together with your friends and family on this particular day and eat this particular meal and celebrate this particular story.
God planned the world's first holiday, first ceremony, also we'd remember.
And then after that, he said to Moses, hey, you better write some of those down too.
And then Jesus shows up climbing to be the Word, the living embodiment of the completion of the story that Israel has been eating and riding for generations.
And he says, all that you and all of your ancestors have been remembering, it's all just so that you could recognize me when I was here in your midst.
And on the last night of Jesus' life, he sits down at a table on Passover, and he gave them a new meal.
Why would Jesus give them a meal?
Well, he said it, eat this bread and drink this cup in remembrance of me, a new meal to remember a new ongoing story.
And at the end of this whole story in Revelation, the final book in the Bible, what does God say to John when he's writing the final installment in the story that we're supposed to remember and find ourselves in for all time?
He says this in Revelation 10, then the voice that I heard
that I heard from heaven spoke to me once more.
Go and take the scroll that lies open in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea and on the land.
So I went to the angel and asked him to give me the little scroll.
He said to me, take it and eat it.
Look, this book right here, it's not supposed to be read.
It's supposed to be gnawed on, chewed on, savored, dog and boned.
until you get every last bit of this into you so it can be converted into the life that you're living.
All of that is bound up in the first line of the first prayer, who meditates on his law day and night.
In the words of Henry now and the Holy Scriptures are also the Word of God.
By the word of God, we are formed into living Christ.
And this formation goes far beyond information, instruction, education, or inspiration.
This formation requires eating the word, chewing on it, digesting it, and thus letting it become true nourishment.
Thus, the word descends from our minds and to our hearts, and there finds a dwelling place.
This is what meditation is all about.
It is a discipline of inner attentiveness to the word.
Meditation, thus, is much more than thinking about the words of scripture.
Much more than trying to understand the parables or analyzing complicated things, meditation is the growing inner availability to the word.
So the word can guide us, can open us, can remove our fears and can come to dwell in us.
True meditation is thus letting the word become flesh in us.
We are practicing prayer in our britishan communities throughout this teaching series.
And this week's exercise is praying scripture in the morning, particularly praying the Psalms.
And so as we gather midweek around tables all throughout our city, that is exactly what we will be doing.
And as your practice goes on from there into your daily life, it's not gonna look exactly like mine or his or hers.
Joyce Huggett, a working mother of three, wrote a phenomenal book on prayer, titled The Joy of Listening to God.
Henry Nowyn, a celibate Catholic priest, wrote a phenomenal book on prayer, titled The Only Necessary Thing.
Both of them emphasized the exact same practices and priorities, and both of them personally expressed those practices in entirely different ways, based on their life stage availability, limitation, and personality.
Meaning, this practice is going to be different if you're a retiree versus if you're a working professional.
It's going to be different if you're a college student versus a single working parent.
It's going to be different if you're a cognitive processor who loves order and tends to err on the side of perfectionism versus an emotional processor who hates order who errs on the side of spontaneity and fun.
I'm not instructing you to mimic me.
Just don't dismiss me.
Don't count yourself out of the very ritual that shaped the lives of all who call Jesus, Lord, across culture, language, life stage, personality type, and opportunity and limitation for thousands of years.
Make it your own, and put it into practice.
The Nakezny people of Cascade had, they can't teach us everything about prayer, but they do have something to show us about the power of ritual.
Kimmer and Braiding Sweetgrass, she goes on to lament the fact that the ceremonies and rituals that we still celebrate in society today, they're all focused on us.
Birthdays, weddings, funerals.
We mark and make sacred the ordinary occasions in our lives that are about us.
Graduation, retirements, awards.
We charge our accomplishments with reference, and that's all well and good.
In all honesty, I do believe that you are sacred, you are set apart, you are imbued with the image of God, and you are worth making sacred and celebrating.
But Jesus also says that the way to live fullest is not by turning my focus back on myself.
It's the opposite of that.
It's by losing myself in a cruciform sacrificial love for the other people who are in my life today.
Jesus has lose your life, lay all of it down.
And the Psalms prayed authentically, they are a ritual of submitting myself to a greater authority, of losing myself.
An authority whose character summarized in a single word is love.
That he might remake my character summarized in that same word.
Love.
Why don't we stand, we'll respond together.
Thanks for joining the Bridgestown family as we engage in this teaching series.
To learn more about the life of our church and how you can get involved, visit bridgestown.church.com.
If you're interested in contributing financially to Bridgestown Church and to our ministry, you can do that at bridgestown.church.gov.
Wherever you're joining us from, we hope this resource blesses you and encourages you to be with Jesus, become like Jesus, and do what Jesus did.